# Event-driven async microservices

## Overview of interprocess communication in a microservice architecture

There are lots of different IPC technologies to choose from. Services can use synchronous request/response-based communication mechanisms, such as HTTP-based REST or gRPC. Alternatively, they can use asynchronous, message-based communication mechanisms such as AMQP or STOMP. 

There are also a variety of different messages formats. Services can use human-readable, text-based formats such as JSON or XML. Alternatively, they could use a more efficient binary format such as Avro or Protocol Buffers.

### Interaction styles
There are a variety of client-service interaction styles, they can be categorized in two dimensions. The first dimension is whether the interaction is **one-to-one** or **one-to-many**:

* One-to-one: Each client request is processed by exactly one service.
* One-to-many: Each request is processed by multiple services.

The second dimension is whether the interaction is **synchronous** or **asynchronous**:

* Synchronous: The client expects a timely response from the service and might even block while it waits. 
* Asynchronous: The client doesn’t block, and the response, if any, isn’t necessarily sent immediately.

The following are the different types of main interactions:

* **Request/response**: A service client makes a request to a service and waits for a response. The client expects the response to arrive in a timely fashion. This is an interaction style that generally results in services being tightly coupled.
* **Asynchronous request/response**: A service client sends a request to a service, which replies asynchronously. The client doesn’t block while waiting, because the service might not send the response for a long time.
* **Publish/subscribe**: A client publishes a notification message, which is consumed by zero or more interested services. 
* **Publish/async responses**: A client publishes a request message and then waits for a certain amount of time for responses from interested services.

### Evolving APIs
APIs invariably change over time as new features are added, existing features are changed, and (perhaps) old features are removed. In a monolithic application, it’s relatively straightforward to change an API and update all the callers. 

In a microservices-based application, changing a service’s API is a lot more difficult. 
* A service’s clients are other services, which are often developed by other teams. 
* The clients may even be other applications outside of the organization.
* Modern applications are usually never down for maintenance, you’ll typically perform a rolling upgrade of your service, so both old and new versions of a service will be running simultaneously.

It’s important to have a strategy for dealing with these challenges.

>The Semantic Versioning specification (http://semver.org) is a useful guide to versioning APIs. It’s a set of rules that specify how version numbers are used and incremented. Semantic versioning was originally intended to be used for versioning of software packages, but you can use it for versioning APIs in a distributed system.

### Message formats

#### Text-based formats
The first category is text-based formats such as JSON and XML. An advantage of these formats is that not only are they human-readable, they’re self describing. A JSON message is a collection of named properties. 

Similarly, an XML message is effectively a collection of named elements and values. This format enables a consumer of a message to pick out the values of interest and ignore the rest. Consequently, many changes to the message schema can easily be backward-compatible.

A downside of using a text-based messages format is that the messages tend to be verbose, especially XML. Another drawback is the overhead of parsing text, especially when messages are large. Consequently, *if efficiency and performance are important, you may want to consider using a binary format*.

#### Binary formats
There are several different binary formats to choose from. Popular formats include Protocol Buffers (https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/docs/overview) and Avro (https://avro.apache.org). Both formats provide a typed IDL for defining the structure of your messages. 

One difference between these two binary formats is that Protocol Buffers uses tagged fields, whereas an Avro consumer needs to know the schema in order to interpret messages. As a result, handling API evolution is easier with Protocol Buffers than with Avro. 

#### Fetching multiple resources in a single request
REST resources are usually oriented around business objects, such as Consumer and Order. Consequently, a common problem when designing a REST API is how to enable the client to retrieve multiple related objects in a single request. 

For example, imagine that a REST client wanted to retrieve an Order and the Order's Consumer. A pure REST API would require the client to make at least two requests, one for the Order and another for its Consumer. A more complex scenario would require even more round-trips and suffer from excessive latency.

One solution to this problem is for an API to allow the client to retrieve related resources when it gets a resource:

```
GET /orders/order-id-1345?expand=consumer
```

The query parameter specifies the related resources to return with the Order. This approach works well in many scenarios but it’s often insufficient for more complex scenarios. It’s also potentially time-consuming to implement. This has led to the increasing popularity of alternative API technologies such as GraphQL (http://graphql.org) and Netflix Falcor (http://netflix.github.io/falcor/), which are designed to support efficient data fetching.


## Resources
- https://softwaremill.com/data-serialization-tools-comparison-avro-vs-protobuf/
- 
