# Service Routing

In a distributed architecture like a microservice, there will come a point where we’ll need to ensure that critical behaviors such as security, logging, and tracking users across multiple service calls occur. To implement this functionality, we’ll want these attributes to be consistently enforced across all of our services without the need for each individual development team to build their own solution. While it’s possible to use a common library or framework to assist with building these capabilities directly in an individual service, doing so has these implications:
* It’s challenging to implement these capabilities in each service consistently. 
* Pushing the responsibilities to implement cross-cutting concerns like security and logging down to the individual development teams greatly increases the odds that someone will not implement them properly or will forget to do them. 
* It’s possible to create a hard dependency across all our services. The more capabilities we build into a common framework shared across all our services, the more difficult it is to change or add behavior in our common code without having to recompile and redeploy all our services. Suddenly an upgrade of core capabilities built into a shared library becomes a long migration process.

To solve this problem, we need to abstract these cross-cutting concerns into a service that can sit independently and act as a filter and router for all the microservice calls in our architecture. We call this service a *gateway*. Our service clients no longer directly call a microservice. Instead, all calls are routed through the service gateway, which acts as a single *Policy Enforcement Point (PEP)*, and are then routed to a final destination.

The use of a centralized PEP means that cross-cutting service concerns can be carried out in a single place without the individual development teams having to implement those concerns. Examples of cross-cutting concerns that can be implemented in a service gateway:
* **Static routing** A service gateway places all service calls behind a single URL and API route. This simplifies development as we only have to know about one ser- vice endpoint for all of our services.
* **Dynamic routing** A service gateway can inspect incoming service requests and, based on the data from the incoming request, perform intelligent routing for the service caller. For instance, customers participating in a beta program might have all calls to a service routed to a specific cluster of services that are running a different version of code from what everyone else is using.
* **Authentication and authorization** Because all service calls route through a ser- vice gateway, the service gateway is a natural place to check whether the callers of a service have authenticated themselves.
* **Metric collection and logging** A service gateway can be used to collect metrics and log information as a service call passes through it. You can also use the service gateway to confirm that critical pieces of information are in place for user requests, thereby ensuring that logging is uniform. 


## Resources
- Spring Microservices in Action (Chapter 8)
- Microservices with SpringBoot3 and SpringCloud (Chapter 10)