# Spring Boot Resilience4j

## What is Resilience?
Resilience is the ability of a system to withstand and recover from failures. In the context of software development, it refers to building applications that can handle failures gracefully and continue to provide a seamless user experience. It involves designing applications in a way that they can handle and adapt to various failure scenarios, such as network issues, service disruptions, or high-load situations. Resilient applications minimize the impact of failures and maintain stability even in challenging conditions.

### Understanding the Importance of Resiliency
Considering resiliency is crucial for building robust and reliable applications. Here are a few reasons why resiliency should be a key consideration:

* Enhanced User Experience: Resilient applications continue functioning and serving users even when failures occur, ensuring a seamless user experience.
* Business Continuity: By handling failures gracefully, resilient applications ensure business continuity and minimize the impact of disruptions on critical operations.
* Scalability and Performance: Resilient applications are designed to scale and handle varying loads, enabling them to meet user demands efficiently.
* System Stability: Resilient systems are better equipped to recover from failures, reducing downtime and enhancing overall system stability.

## What is Resilience4j
Resilience4j is a lightweight fault tolerance library designed for functional programming. Resilience4j provides higher-order functions (decorators) to enhance any functional interface, lambda expression or method reference with a Circuit Breaker, Rate Limiter, Retry or Bulkhead. 

You can stack more than one decorator on any functional interface, lambda expression or method reference. The advantage is that you have the choice to select the decorators you need and nothing else.

```
Supplier<String> supplier = () -> service.sayHelloWorld(param1);

String result = Decorators.ofSupplier(supplier)
  .withBulkhead(Bulkhead.ofDefaults("name"))
  .withCircuitBreaker(CircuitBreaker.ofDefaults("name"))
  .withRetry(Retry.ofDefaults("name"))
  .withFallback(asList(CallNotPermittedException.class, BulkheadFullException.class),  
      throwable -> "Hello from fallback")
  .get()
```


## Resources
* https://resilience4j.readme.io/docs/getting-started
* https://www.baeldung.com/resilience4j
* https://www.baeldung.com/spring-boot-resilience4j