# Microservices resiliency

## Resilience4j
Resilience4j is a lightweight fault tolerance library designed for functional programming. Resilience4j provides higher-order functions (decorators) to enhance any functional interface, lambda expression or method reference with a Circuit Breaker, Rate Limiter, Retry or Bulkhead. 

You can stack more than one decorator on any functional interface, lambda expression or method reference. The advantage is that you have the choice to select the decorators you need and nothing else.

```
Supplier<String> supplier = () -> service.sayHelloWorld(param1);

String result = Decorators.ofSupplier(supplier)
  .withBulkhead(Bulkhead.ofDefaults("name"))
  .withCircuitBreaker(CircuitBreaker.ofDefaults("name"))
  .withRetry(Retry.ofDefaults("name"))
  .withFallback(asList(CallNotPermittedException.class, BulkheadFullException.class),  
      throwable -> "Hello from fallback")
  .get()
```

To use the library as an integration in Spring Boot add the following dependencies:

```
<dependency>
    <groupId>org.springframework.boot</groupId>
    <artifactId>spring-boot-starter-aop</artifactId>
</dependency>
<dependency>
    <groupId>org.springframework.boot</groupId>
    <artifactId>spring-boot-starter-actuator</artifactId>
</dependency>
<dependency>
    <groupId>org.springframework.cloud</groupId>
    <artifactId>spring-cloud-starter-circuitbreaker-reactor-resilience4j</artifactId>
</dependency>
```

### Circuit Breaker

Resilience4j exposes information about circuit breakers at runtime in a number of ways:
* The current state of a circuit breaker can be monitored using the microservice’s actuator health endpoint, **/actuator/health**.
* The circuit breaker also publishes events on an actuator endpoint, for example, state transitions and **/actuator/circuitbreakerevents**.

To control the logic in a circuit breaker, Resilience4j can be configured using standard Spring Boot configuration files. We will use the following configuration parameters:

```
resilience4j.circuitbreaker:
  instances:
    time:
      allowHealthIndicatorToFail: false
      registerHealthIndicator: true
      slidingWindowType: COUNT_BASED
      slidingWindowSize: 5
      failureRateThreshold: 50
      waitDurationInOpenState: 10000
      permittedNumberOfCallsInHalfOpenState: 3
      automaticTransitionFromOpenToHalfOpenEnabled: true
      ignoreExceptions:
```

* **allowHealthIndicatorToFail**: tells Resilience4j not to affect the status of the health endpoint. This means that the health endpoint will still report "UP" even if one of the component’s circuit breakers is in an open or half-open state. It is very important that the health state of the component is not reported as "DOWN" just because one of its circuit breakers is not in a closed state.
* **registerHealthIndicator**: enables Resilience4j to fill in the health endpoint with information regarding the state of its circuit breakers.
* **slidingWindowType**: To determine if a circuit breaker needs to be opened, Resilience4j uses a sliding window, counting the most recent events to make the decision. The sliding windows can either be based on a fixed number of calls or a fixed elapsed time.
* **slidingWindowSize**: The number of calls in a closed state, which are used to determine whether the circuit should be opened. We will set this parameter to 5.
* **failureRateThreshold**: The threshold, in percent, for failed calls that will cause the circuit to be opened. We will set this parameter to 50%. This setting, together with slidingWindowSize set to 5, means that if three or more of the last five calls are faults, then the circuit will open.
* **waitDurationInOpenState**: Specifies how long the circuit stays in an open state, that is, before it transitions to the half-open state. We will set this parameter to 10000 ms. 
* **permittedNumberOfCallsInHalfOpenState**: The number of calls in the half-open state, which are used to determine whether the circuit will be opened again or go back to the normal, closed state. We will set this parameter to 3, meaning that the circuit breaker will decide whether the circuit will be opened or closed based on the first three calls after the circuit has transitioned to the half-open state. Since the failureRateThreshold parameters are set to 50%, the circuit will be open again if two or three calls fail. Otherwise, the circuit will be closed.
* **automaticTransitionFromOpenToHalfOpenEnabled**: Determines whether the circuit breaker will automatically transition to the half-open state once the waiting period is over. Otherwise, it will wait for the first call after the waiting period is over until it transitions to the half-open state.
* **ignoreExceptions**: This can be used to specify exceptions that should not be counted as faults. Expected business exceptions such as not found or invalid input are typical exceptions that the circuit breaker should ignore; users who search for non-existing data or enter invalid input should not cause the circuit to open.

Now, it is enough to annotate methods requisting external resources (e.g., other services, databases, ...) with the corresponding annotation. 

```
    @Retry(name = "time")
    @TimeLimiter(name = "time")
    @CircuitBreaker(name = "time", fallbackMethod = "getTimeFallbackValue")
    public Mono<LocalTime> getTime(int delay, int faultPercent) {
        URI url = UriComponentsBuilder.fromUriString(TIME_SERVICE_URL + "?delay={delay}&faultPercent={faultPercent}").build(delay, faultPercent);

        LOG.info("Getting time on URL: {}", url);
        return webClient.get().uri(url).retrieve().bodyToMono(LocalTime.class)
                .doOnError(ex -> handleException(ex));
    }
```

### Time Limiter
To help a circuit breaker handle slow or unresponsive services, a timeout mechanism can be helpful. Resilience4j’s timeout mechanism, called a TimeLimiter, can be configured using standard Spring Boot configuration files. We will use the following configuration parameter:

```
resilience4j.timelimiter:
  instances:
    time:
      timeoutDuration: 3s
```

* **timeoutDuration**: Specifies how long a TimeLimiter instance waits for a call to complete before it throws a timeout exception. We will set it to 2s.

### Retry

Resilience4j exposes retry information in the same way as it does for circuit breakers when it comes to events and metrics but does not provide any health information. 

Retry events are accessible on the actuator endpoint: **/actuator/retryevents**. To control the retry logic, Resilience4j can be configured using standard Spring Boot configuration files. We will use the following configuration parameters:

```
resilience4j.retry:
  instances:
    time:
      maxAttempts: 3
      waitDuration: 500
      # enableExponentialBackoff: true
      # exponentialBackoffMultiplier: 2
      # enableRandomizedWait: true
      # randomizedWaitFactor: 0.5
      retryExceptions:
        - org.springframework.web.reactive.function.client.WebClientResponseException$InternalServerError
```

* **maxAttempts**: The number of attempts before giving up, including the first call. We will set this parameter to 3, allowing a maximum of two retry attempts after an initial failed call.
* **waitDuration**: The wait time before the next retry attempt. We will set this value to 1000 ms, meaning that we will wait 1 second between retries.
* **retryExceptions**: A list of exceptions that will trigger a retry. We will only trigger retries on InternalServerError exceptions, that is, when HTTP requests respond with a 500 status code.

### Bulkhead

```
server:
  tomcat:
    threads:
      max: 15
resilience4j.bulkhead:
  instances:
    ratingService:
      maxConcurrentCalls: 10
      maxWaitDuration: 10ms
```

* Set the max threads for the tomcat to be 15. (This is just to simulate resource exhaustion).
* **maxConcurrentCalls**: max number of concurrent calls allowed downstream.
* **maxWaitDuration**: any additional requests will wait for the given duration. Otherwise, it will go with default/fallback method.

## Resources
- Microservices with SpringBoot3 and SpringCloud (Chapter 13)
* https://resilience4j.readme.io/docs/getting-started
* https://www.baeldung.com/resilience4j
* https://www.baeldung.com/spring-boot-resilience4j
* https://blog.acolyer.org/2015/01/15/the-tail-at-scale/
* https://jmeter.apache.org/